# Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution: Coalescent models for pondscapes and pondscapes randomization analysis (FEE_Coal_Rand_Pondscape)

Project and lines of analysis linked to the paper entitled Heterogeneity in the isolation of patches may be essential for the action of metacommunity mechanisms by Ana I. Borthagaray, David Cunillera-Montcusí, Jordi Bou, Irene Tornero, Dani Boix, Maria Anton, Esteban Ortiz, Thomas Mehner, Xavier D. Quintana, Stéphanie Gascón and Matías Arim (DOI: ). 

Contact authros at: matiasarim@gmail.com ; borthagaray@gmail.com ; david.cunillera@dcm.cat

A tutorial is available with all the corresponding code at: https://metacommunity-lab.github.io/FEE_Coal_Rand_Pondscape/

Abstract:

The spatial isolation gradient of communities and the gradient in the species dispersal ability are recognized determinants of biodiversity in metacommunities. However, mean field models dominated the literature and spatial explicit models or experiments focused on idealized spatial arrangements of communities. Consequently, the role of real landscapes, interacting with the dispersal ability of the species, on metacommunity biodiversity was little attended. We focus on six metacommunities for which confident information about the spatial arrangement of water bodies is available. Using coalescent metacommunity models and null models that randomize the location of water bodies, we estimated the potential effect of the landscape on biodiversity and its dependence on species dispersal ability. At extremely low or high dispersal abilities, the location of ponds does not influence diversity because different communities are equally affected by the low or high incoming dispersal. At intermediate dispersal abilities, peripheral communities present much lower richness and higher beta diversity than central communities. Moreover, metacommunities from real landscapes are able to host much more biodiversity than randomized landscapes. A result that is connected with the heterogeneity in the geographic isolation of communities. These results indicate that real landscapes can host larger diversity than randomized ones and that the gradient in spatial isolation is a main feature of landscapes determining metacommunity diversity. In a dispersal gradient, mass effect systematically increases local richness and decreases beta diversity, but the spatial arrangement of patches only has a large importance in metacommunity processes at intermediate dispersal levels. Consequently, landscape structure determines biodiversity patterns through those organisms with dispersal abilities that ensure the access to central locations but limits dispersal in isolated communities. The ongoing reduction in spatial extent and simplification of landscapes may consequently undermine the metacommunity processes that support biodiversity, what should be explicitly considered on preserving and restoring strategies.

